LIMITS

In mathematics, a limit is the value that a function (or sequence) approaches as the input (or index) approaches some value. Limits are essential to calculus and mathematical analysis, and are used to define continuity, derivatives, and integrals.
In formulas, a limit of a function is usually written as

and is read as "the limit of f of x as x approaches c equals L". This means that the value of the function f can be made arbitrarily close to L, by choosing x sufficiently close to c. Alternatively, the fact that a function f approaches the limit L as x approaches c is sometimes denoted by a right arrow (→ or ), as in

which reads " of  tends to  as  tends to ".
Suppose f is a real-valued function and c is a real number. Intuitively speaking, the expression

means that f(x) can be made to be as close to L as desired, by making x sufficiently close to c. In that case, the above equation can be read as "the limit of f of x, as x approaches c, is L".
Formally, the definition of the "limit of  as  approaches " is given as follows. The limit is a real number  so that, given an arbitrary real number  (thought of as the "error"), there is a  such that, for any  satisfying , it holds that . This is known as the (ε, δ)-definition of limit.
The inequality  is used to exclude  from the set of points under consideration, but some authors do not include this in their definition of limits, replacing  with simply . This replacement is equivalent to additionally requiring that  be continuous at .
It can be proven that there is an equivalent definition which makes manifest the connection between limits of sequences and limits of functions.[10] The equivalent definition is given as follows. First observe that for every sequence  in the domain of , there is an associated sequence , the image of the sequence under . The limit is a real number  so that, for all sequences , the associated sequence .
One-sided limit

It is possible to define the notion of having a "left-handed" limit ("from below"), and a notion of a "right-handed" limit ("from above"). These need not agree. An example is given by the positive indicator function, , defined such that  if , and  if . At , the function has a "left-handed limit" of 0, a "right-handed limit" of 1, and its limit does not exist. Symbolically, this can be stated as, for this example, , and , and from this it can be deduced  doesn't exist, because .
Infinity in limits of functions
It is possible to define the notion of "tending to infinity" in the domain of ,


In this expression, the infinity is considered to be signed: either  or . The "limit of f as x tends to positive infinity" is defined as follows. It is a real number  such that, given any real , there exists an  so that if , . Equivalently, for any sequence , we have .
It is also possible to define the notion of "tending to infinity" in the value of ,


The definition is given as follows. Given any real number , there is a  so that for , the absolute value of the function . Equivalently, for any sequence , the sequence .
Continuity of a function at a point
The definition of continuity at a point is given through limits.
The above definition of a limit is true even if . Indeed, the function f need not even be defined at c. However, if  is defined and is equal to , then the function is said to be continuous at the point .
Equivalently, the function is continuous at  if  as , or in terms of sequences, whenever , then .
An example of a limit where  is not defined at  is given below.
Consider the function



then f(1) is not defined, yet as x moves arbitrarily close to 1, f(x) correspondingly approaches 2:

Thus, f(x) can be made arbitrarily close to the limit of 2—just by making x sufficiently close to 1.
In other words,


This can also be calculated algebraically, as  for all real numbers x ≠ 1.
Now, since x + 1 is continuous in x at 1, we can now plug in 1 for x, leading to the equation


In addition to limits at finite values, functions can also have limits at infinity. For example, consider the function

where:

f(100) = 1.9900
f(1000) = 1.9990
f(10000) = 1.9999
As x becomes extremely large, the value of f(x) approaches 2, and the value of f(x) can be made as close to 2 as one could wish—by making x sufficiently large. So in this case, the limit of f(x) as x approaches infinity is 2, or in mathematical notation,


Continuous functions
An important class of functions when considering limits are continuous functions. These are precisely those functions which preserve limits, in the sense that if  is a continuous function, then whenever  in the domain of , then the limit  exists and furthermore is .
In the most general setting of topological spaces, a short proof is given below:
Let  be a continuous function between topological spaces  and . By definition, for each open set  in , the preimage  is open in .
Now suppose  is a sequence with limit  in . Then  is a sequence in , and  is some point.
Choose a neighborhood  of . Then  is an open set (by continuity of ) which in particular contains , and therefore  is a neighborhood of . By the convergence of  to , there exists an  such that for , we have .
Then applying  to both sides gives that, for the same , for each  we have . Originally  was an arbitrary neighborhood of , so . This concludes the proof.
In real analysis, for the more concrete case of real-valued functions defined on a subset , that is, , a continuous function may also be defined as a function which is continuous at every point of its domain.
